feat: add multi-cluster metrics and alerting post (#86)
mesosphere/d2iq-engineering-blog: content/posts/multi-cluster-monitoring-and-alerting/index.md

---
authors: ["mhrabovcin"]
title: "Multi-cluster monitoring and alerting"

> date: 2023-09-05T12:22:45+02:00

Reviewer: Please preset for tomorrow's publishing. 
**Note!!** that until that time, previews won't work with this change - maybe land this change at the very end of all reviews and changes.  

```suggestion
date: 2023-09-06T12:00:00+02:00
```

tags: ["dkp", "multicluster", "monitoring", "alerting", "prometheus", "thanos"]
excerpt: How to integrate metrics to a Go application and how to act on those metrics.
feature_image: mitchel-boot-hOf9BaYUN88-unsplash.jpg
---

Metrics and monitoring are essential for ensuring the health and performance of Go applications. Metrics are data points
that represent the state of an application, such as CPU usage, memory usage, and requests per minute. Monitoring is the
process of collecting, storing, and analyzing metrics to identify problems and trends. By monitoring their applications,

> developers can proactively identify and fix problems before they impact users.

Author: Thanks!

The D2iQ Kubernetes Platform (DKP) comes with monitoring stack components consisting of [Prometheus][], which collects

> metrics, [Grafana][], which can visualize and presents the metrics, [Alertmanager][], that handles acting on metrics and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metrics, [Grafana][], which can visualize and present the metrics, [Alertmanager][], which handles acting on metrics and
```

> sending alerts to 3rd party service, and [Thanos][] that handles multi cluster functionality of [Prometheus][]. These

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sending alerts to 3rd party service, and [Thanos][] which handles multi-cluster functionality of [Prometheus][]. These
```

components are configured to provide monitoring and alerting for applications launched on DKP.

## How to emit metrics from Go application

> To emit metrics from a Go application, you can use the Prometheus library. The [Prometheus library][] provides a number
> of functions that can be used to create and emit metrics. There are multiple types of metrics that application can emit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To emit metrics from a Go application, use the [Prometheus library][], which provides a number
of helpful functions. There are multiple types of metrics that application can emit.
```

> The type of metrics defines how the Prometheus will interpret the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The type of metrics defines how Prometheus will interpret the data.
```

> Type type of metrics defines how the Prometheus will interpret the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The type of metrics defines how the Prometheus will interpret the data.
```

Author: Yes you are right.

Prometheus has four types of metrics:

* *Counters*: Counters are metrics that can only increase or reset to zero. They are typically used to track things like
  the number of requests, the number of errors, and the number of bytes transferred.
* *Gauges*: Gauges are metrics that can go up and down. They are typically used to track things like the current memory
  usage, the current CPU usage, and the number of concurrent connections.
* *Histograms*: Histograms are used to track the distribution of values. They are typically used to track things like the
  response time of requests, the size of requests, and the number of errors.

> * *Summaries*: Summaries are similar to histograms, but they also track the quantiles of the distribution. This can be
>   useful for identifying outliers and understanding the tail of the distribution.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* *Summaries*: Summaries are similar to histograms, but they also track the quantiles of the distribution. They are typically used to identify outliers and understand the tail of the distribution.

```

> An example Go application that would expose an `/increment` HTTP handler that would increase a counter metric would look

Reviewer 2: just a lot of 'would' in the same sentence.

like this:

```go
package main

import (
    "github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus"
    "github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promhttp"
)

func main() {
    // Create a counter metric.
    requests := prometheus.NewCounter(
        prometheus.CounterOpts{
            Name: "my_app_requests_total",
            Help: "The total number of requests.",
        },
    )
    // Register the counter with Prometheus.
    prometheus.MustRegister(requests)

    http.Handle("/increment", func(w http.ResponseWriter, req *http.Request) {
        requests.Inc()
        fmt.Fprintf(w, "OK")
    })
    http.Handle("/metrics", promhttp.Handler())
    http.ListenAndServe(":8090", nil)
}
```

> For more details see the [prometheus tutorial](https://prometheus.io/docs/tutorials/instrumenting_http_server_in_go/) on

Reviewer 3: Minor nit - Prometheus should be caps'ed here

```suggestion
For more details see the [Prometheus tutorial](https://prometheus.io/docs/tutorials/instrumenting_http_server_in_go/) on
```

how to integrate prometheus library and emit metrics.

## How to integrate metrics with DKP

Prometheus uses a pull model to collect metrics. This means that Prometheus actively fetches metrics from the targets,
rather than the targets pushing metrics to Prometheus. In the example above the prometheus handler only creates a HTTP

> handler on the `/metrics` path but its not actively pushing collected metrics anywhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handler on the `/metrics` path but it is not actively pushing collected metrics anywhere.
```

> When an application runs on Kubernetes cluster in a Pod it is usually exposed via `Service` resource that can expose

Reviewer 3: I don't know if this is actually better, but it flows better in my mind.

```suggestion
When an application runs  in a Pod on a Kubernetes cluster it is usually exposed via `Service` resource that can expose
```

> Pods networking ports to rest of the cluster. The Prometheus operator that comes on DKP exposes a custom resource types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pods networking ports to the rest of the cluster. The Prometheus operator that comes with DKP exposes a custom resource types
```

> Pods networking ports to the rest of the cluster. The Prometheus operator that comes with DKP exposes a custom resource types

Reviewer 3: I don't think "a" is necessary here, because custom resource types is plural

```suggestion
Pods networking ports to the rest of the cluster. The Prometheus operator that comes with DKP exposes custom resource types
```

> Pods networking ports to the rest of the cluster. The Prometheus operator that comes with DKP exposes a custom resource types
> CRD `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` that should be used to configure prometheus instance to include a particular

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pods networking ports to the rest of the cluster. The Prometheus operator that comes with DKP exposes custom resource types
CRD `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` that should be used to configure Prometheus instances to include a particular
```

> Kubernetes service into scraping targets from which prometheus will read the metrics data.

Reviewer 3: nit - just capitalization

```suggestion
Kubernetes service into scraping targets from which Prometheus will read the metrics data.
```

When creating own `ServiceMonitor` it is necessary to include the `prometheus.kommander.d2iq.io/select: "true"` label on
the resource. Based on this label the default instance of Prometheus installed on DKP will include the `ServiceMonitor`
configuration. The Prometheus operator allows to run multiple Prometheus instances and the label selector is used to

> associate service monitors with Prometheus instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
associate service monitors with a Prometheus instance.
```

> When creating own `ServiceMonitor` it is necessary to include the `prometheus.kommander.d2iq.io/select: "true"` label on
> the resource. Based on this label the default instance of Prometheus installed on DKP will include the `ServiceMonitor`
> configuration. The Prometheus operator allows to run multiple Prometheus instances and the label selector is used to
> associate service monitors with a Prometheus instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When creating a `ServiceMonitor`, it is necessary to include the `prometheus.kommander.d2iq.io/select: "true"` label on
the resource. Based on this label, the default instance of Prometheus installed on DKP will include the `ServiceMonitor`
configuration. The Prometheus operator is then allowed to run multiple Prometheus instances and the label selector is used to
associate service monitors with a Prometheus instance.
```

> In the example bellow the `ServiceMonitor` instructs the DKP Prometheus to scrape data from `Service` that matches the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below the `ServiceMonitor` instructs the DKP Prometheus to scrape data from the `Service` that matches the
```

> In the example below the `ServiceMonitor` instructs the DKP Prometheus to scrape data from the `Service` that matches the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example below, the `ServiceMonitor` instructs the DKP Prometheus to scrape data from the `Service` that matches the
```

Reviewer 2: So I'm struggling with 'the DKP Prometheus' as that's not grammatically correct. It should be something like:

The DKP Prometheus instance OR The DKP Prometheus Operator  - but I'm not sure which is correct.

label `app: my-go-app` on port `http` and the `/metrics` path.

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: my-go-app-monitor
  namespace: my-namespace
  labels:
    prometheus.kommander.d2iq.io/select: "true"
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-go-app
  endpoints:
    - port: http
      interval: 1s
      path: /metrics
      scheme: http
```

To confirm that metrics are scraped by prometheus visit the `https://<CLUSTER_DOMAIN>/dkp/prometheus/graph` and enter
`my_app_requests_total` to the console to see the metrics.

## Alerting

Alerting is the process of notifying users when a metric or set of metrics exceeds a predefined threshold. This can be

> used to proactively identify problems before they impact users. DKP comes with [Alertmanager][] installation that can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used to proactively identify problems before they impact users. DKP comes with an [Alertmanager][] installation that can be
```

used to receive alerts from Prometheus and send them to a variety of notification channels, such as email, Slack, or

> PagerDuty. Alertmanager itself is not creating any alerts but rather only propagates and routes information based on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PagerDuty. Alertmanager itself is not creating any alerts, but rather only propagates and routes information based on
```

routing rules. Alerts are created by Prometheus by continuously evaluating metrics values and creating alerts by calling

> Alertmanager API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Alertmanager API.
```

To create an alert definition use the `PrometheusRule` resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: PrometheusRule
metadata:
  name: my-app-example-rule
  namespace: my-namespace
  labels:
    prometheus.kommander.d2iq.io/select: "true"
spec:
  groups:
  - name: my-app
    rules:
    - alert: MyAppExampleRule
      annotations:
        description: ""
        summary: Number of requests is over a threshold
      expr: |-
        my_app_requests_total > 5
      for: 1m
      labels:
        severity: critical
```

> The Prometheus operator will apply this configuration to default Prometheus which is configured to push alerts to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Prometheus operator will apply this configuration to the default Prometheus which is configured to push alerts to
```

> Alertmanager. When the number of requests will go over 5 the Prometheus will create new alert by calling Alertmanager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alertmanager. When the number of requests will go over 5 Prometheus will create a new alert by calling the Alertmanager
```

> The Prometheus operator will apply this configuration to the default Prometheus which is configured to push alerts to
> Alertmanager. When the number of requests will go over 5 Prometheus will create a new alert by calling the Alertmanager

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Prometheus operator will apply this configuration to the default Prometheus instance, which is configured to push alerts to
Alertmanager. When the number of requests goes over 5, Prometheus will create a new alert by calling the Alertmanager
```

HTTP API. The `PrometheusRule` can be created on DKP management or attached clusters.

## Multi-cluster monitoring and alerting

The DKP metrics stack is configured by default to collect metrics across all managed clusters and have them available in

> the central management DKP cluster. For that purpose DKP comes with Thanos which is a tool that can be used to extend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the central management DKP cluster. For that purpose, DKP comes with Thanos which is a tool that can be used to extend
```

Prometheus's capabilities for collecting and storing metrics across multiple clusters. Thanos Query component can be
used to query metrics from multiple Prometheus servers in a single place. This makes it possible to view and analyze
metrics from all of the clusters in a single place.

> To make alerting possible on metrics from all clusters it is necessary to enable Thanos Ruler component. Thanos Ruler is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make alerting possible on metrics from all clusters, it is necessary to enable Thanos Ruler component. Thanos Ruler is
```

> a component of Thanos that can be used to evaluate Prometheus recording and alerting rules against a chosen query API
> and then send the results directly to remote storage. It can be used to make alerting possible across multiple clusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a component of Thanos that can be used to evaluate Prometheus recording and alerting rules against a chosen query API,
and then send the results directly to remote storage. It can be used to make alerting possible across multiple clusters
```

by evaluating rules against a central query API that aggregates data from all of the clusters.

> In order to enable Ruler on DKP management cluster add the following configmap:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to enable Ruler on the DKP management cluster add the following configmap:
```

> In order to enable Ruler on the DKP management cluster add the following configmap:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable Ruler on the DKP management cluster, add the following configmap:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: kube-prometheus-stack-overrides
  namespace: kommander
data:
  values.yaml: |
    thanosRuler:
      enabled: true
      thanosRulerSpec:
        queryEndpoints:
          - http://thanos-query.kommander:10902/
        alertmanagersUrl:
          - http://kube-prometheus-stack-alertmanager.kommander:9093
        ruleSelector:
          matchLabels:
            role: thanos-alerts
        routePrefix: /dkp/ruler
        externalPrefix: /dkp/ruler
      ingress:
        enabled: true
        paths:
          - /dkp/ruler
        annotations:
          traefik.ingress.kubernetes.io/router.middlewares: "kommander-forwardauth@kubernetescrd"
          traefik.ingress.kubernetes.io/router.tls: "true"
```

And apply the override to the `kube-prometheus-stack` `AppDeployment`.

```sh
cat <<<EOF | kubectl patch --type merge -n kommander appdeployments kube-prometheus-stack --patch-file=/dev/stdin
spec:
  configOverrides:
    name: kube-prometheus-stack-overrides
EOF
```

> The configuration above will deploy the Thanos Ruler on the DKP Management cluster, it will expose its UI on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration above will deploy the Thanos Ruler on the DKP management cluster, it will expose its UI on the
```

> The configuration above will deploy the Thanos Ruler on the DKP management cluster, it will expose its UI on the
> `https://<CLUSTER_DOMAIN>/dkp/ruler` URL and it will limit the rules only with `role: thanos-alerts` to be used by
> Ruler. The Ruler is configured same way as Prometheus using the `PrometheusRule` resource. Limiting the configuration to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration above will deploy the Thanos Ruler on the DKP management cluster, it will expose its UI on the
`https://<CLUSTER_DOMAIN>/dkp/ruler` URL, and it will limit the rules only with `role: thanos-alerts` to be used by
Ruler. The Ruler is configured the same way as Prometheus using the `PrometheusRule` resource. Limiting the configuration to
```

the specific label allows to select which configuration will be applied to the Prometheus and which will be applied to

> the Thanos Ruler. The exactly same `PrometheusRule` resources can now create alerts for data coming from multiple

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the Thanos Ruler. The exact same `PrometheusRule` resources can now create alerts for data coming from multiple
```

clusters.

The final result looks like this.

![Diagram](multi-cluster-metrics-alerting.drawio.svg)

## Conclusion

> Multi-cluster monitoring is an important feature of the DKP because it allows you to monitor multiple Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multi-cluster monitoring is an important feature of the DKP platform because it allows you to monitor multiple Kubernetes
```

clusters from a single pane of glass. This can help you to identify and troubleshoot problems that affect multiple

> clusters, and to plan for the capacity needs of your clusters. DKP gives administrators flexibility to define deploy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clusters, and to plan for the capacity needs of your clusters. DKP gives administrators flexibility to define and deploy
```
